# Chapter Two [Captain Kopeikin thinks Chichikov a revizor sent by the government to review his case…give him his pension]
NO ONE WAS saying that the dead were still alive, or that the dead—by virtue of their having once been alive—did not vanish and cease to exercise an influence over the world; or that the dead’s having lived somehow exempted them from a tax status that was in the strictest sense exclusive. No one was suggesting that it was not one of the axioms of world history that, in order to have died, one must have first been alive for a time; and yet this “having been alive for a time” did not confer upon the dead the properties that are, quite demonstrably, within the purview of those who were still living (and who, by that property, had not yet been annihilated)—the shifting of eyebrows, for instance, or the moving of one’s limbs without the aid of an accomplice, or the holding forth amicably on topics of interest to agreeable gentlemen everywhere, or …active measures in the memories and pre-cognitive spaces of an all-too-impressionable public life, and so forth. No, it was absurd to call “dead” that which continued to color the thinking and pronouncements of agreeable gentlemen everywhere. Even supposing the names of the dead were allowed, by some accident of bookkeeping, to persist beyond the death of their referents, merely by their having persisted on certain municipal tax rolls, for instance, this did not imply that the referent persisted, or that any connection between referent and name persisted, by which means the living could “remember” the annihilated soul, invoke their memory at political meetings, and such. For it was plain to see that No, these were apes and imposters of the dead, still subject to annihilation, with names that could be written down and compiled into lists.
But no, Chichikov knew that the dead could not be killed again. You could not exhume the dead and induce a second death upon their already dead cadavers—and that, by that byzantine logic, the dead had not never existed at any point in time. He knew, on the one hand, that the dead, merely by their being dead, did not vanish altogether. The dead left a mark—the little divot of air marking their having once been alive—and that this was very different from people who didn’t exist.

Based on the fundamental conclusion that genocide was committed, the CEH, in keeping with its mandate to present an objective judgement on the events of the internal armed confrontation, indicates that, without prejudice to the fact that the active subjects are the intellectual and material authors of the crimes in the acts of genocide committed in Guatemala, the State is also responsible, because the majority of these acts were the product of a policy pre-established by a command superior to the material perpetrators. -Article 124, U.N. Report of the Commission for Historical Clarification.

ALL AROUND lay a sea of golden gray, which even crested and broke against the little berm of road which the light spring britzka traversed. At the top of a knoll in the distance, a hound turned placidly about a spot on the ground and lay down. Farther on, an untended herd of goats emerged into view from behind a sloping glade of copse and birch trees, driven over the hillcrest by some invisible hand—or rather the hand of wind that lodged, presently, in the high, winding branches and briars, shaking the glade like a giant bouquet—followed by a smattering of black and brown izbas, hay sheds, and mews, which likewise meandered and dispersed and congregated again, with beetling stovepipes and windowpanes that mingled with the twitching ears and noses of the animals in playful mimicry. A splash of low auburn light across one of the open doorframes caught our hero’s attention, presently, where a number of women were busy with the harvested sheaves, one of them reaching down into her many skirts to produce from them a small child, which she scooped up into her arms, the plump rosy cheeks of the two figures contrasting sharply with the black doorway that framed their sudden apparition. But already the whole scene began to wink at Chichikov through the tall golden-grey grass as his britzka descended into another vale, and was gone.
You looked and looked again. But what was it? What was this strange sort of something-or-other that was there? We listen in for the answer, but no answer comes forth. But such was Rus! “Well I,” pipes up someone sitting on the parlor sofa, but then remembers they are drunk and falls silent. No sooner was a thought born and held within the soft arms of consciousness than it bolted off like a racing troika. One looks again, and then one last time, and then one more time after that, but no—there is nothing. Only a peel of laughter and the swirling snow offer any evidence that there had been something there—devil knows it was—and then the laughter and snow also melt and vanish into nothingness.
[Kopeikin thinks Chichikov there to finally give him his pension]
Boom!
Chichikov ducked into the little footwell of his britzka and covered his head as a cannonball whistled overhead and landed near his britzka with a guttural thud!—tossing up bits of soil and heath that landed with a dull patter across the carriage roof and horses’ backs. The speedy mare Assessor rolled a weary eye back at the driver, Selifan, who replied with a stoic nod, as though in concurrence about some secret matter between them. Chichikov, meanwhile, crawled out of the footwell of his britzka in time to view the manor of the estate emerge halfway up a vast knoll, capped in a little cloud of white smoke. The white cloud lifted, presently, revealing a cannon and a willowy figure who bounded down the breach of tangled heath in great lunging strides, bedecked in the green coat and epaulettes and tassels of Bagration’s time; and capped in a densely plumed bicorne, the little shock [little storm] of red and white plumage whipping about in the wind with commemorative fury—like a Fabergé miniaturization of some apocalyptic conflagration. It was the owner of the estate—a certain Captain Kopeikin, whose acquaintance our hero had made at the recent governor’s ball in the town of M.
“Left over from the campaign of ‘12!” he shouted boisterously, pointing back at the cannon, as Chichikov descended the steps of the britzka.
[pegleg missing arm great beetling eyebrows]

Chichikov gave a little laugh and continued striding down the turbulent grain heath, knowing too well the pageantry of meaning and agreeable gentlemen.  Still, it was just the sort of remark that he found paltry, facile—unworthy, at any rate, of the repertoire of agreeable gentlemen.  He could not help that his bile was turned, and he turned and spat briefly, sideways into the wind; and some of the frown that was in his heart found its way up into the corners of his lips, which began twitching presently, with the result that there once again appeared on our hero’s face a look of spectacular meaningness, such as can only be seen at Petersburg dinner parties—it appears to be some sort of roguish bemusement at first, but in the next moment God alone can say: it’s not neurasthenia; it’s not epilepsy, nor even some demonstration of magnetic properties—devil knows what it is!—And he turned aside and vomited briefly into the heath.
“Here are my ducks,” said the Captain meanwhile, not without diffidence, as a man who suspects he is under evaluation.
Indeed, Chichikov saw that they now stood before a pond, around which were gathered a rather large colony of ducks and geese.  It was the hour for bathing, and the gaggle sent up a cogent murmur of splashing and quacking that was immediately caught up in the wind and swept hundreds of versts away.
The two gentlemen swept off across the grass pitch, then, and drew themselves up before the vast expanse of fields, whereupon they had occasion to continue hailing and to saluting each other in the most amicable and mannerly fashion.

Chichikov gave a little laugh and continued striding down the turbulent grain heath, knowing too well the pageantry of meaning and agreeable gentlemen.  Still, it was just the sort of remark that he found paltry, facile—unworthy, at any rate, of the repertoire of agreeable gentlemen.  He could not help that his bile was turned, and he turned and spat briefly, sideways into the wind; and some of the frown that was in his heart found its way up into the corners of his lips, which began twitching sporadically, with the result that there once again appeared on our hero’s face a look of spectacular meaningness, such as can only be seen at Petersburg dinner parties—it appears to be some sort of roguish bemusement at first, but in the next moment God alone can say: it’s not neurasthenia; it’s not epilepsy, nor even some demonstration of magnetic properties—devil knows what it is!  He turned aside and vomited briefly into the heath.
The two gentlemen swept off across the grass pitch, then, staggering down the little rut of heath, their little hairs swept up and battered about like little sails on the quay, making it difficult for them to keep their footing.  Distant mooing and clatterings of mule hooves reached their ears from two or three directions at once, divided and reconstituted by the wind.  Further on, beyond unwanted outbreaks of copse and forest growth, the cultivated shards swept together into a vast brown sea extending onward through one province after another until—but just until what was not known—following the downward slope of the flowing sheaves of grain where they ran against a broken down fence, and beyond that Chichikov saw a subsequent field extending almost to the horizon where a distant herd of black goats peeked bashfully over the—or no, now he saw correctly, those were the little houses of the serfs’ village.
“Here are my ducks,” said the corporal somewhat diffidently, as though not quite sure where to begin.
A turkey, meanwhile, who was among the fowl, began bobbing his head up and down meaningly, and slowly accosted our hero.  Chichikov feigned indifference—as when one has been recognized at a crowded gathering by someone one doesn’t wish to talk to.  But then his hand was forced by a sneeze, and the turkey exclaimed something which sounded very much like “God bless you!”—to which Chichikov responded, “Fool!”
“That fence down there,” said Chichikov, pointing; and they staggered down the heath rut toward the low row of stones.
When they reached the little pile of stones, Chichikov pursed his lips and laid his hand on one of the stones with such forthrightness that the Captain was deeply impressed; he forgot his concern, and also stepped forward, and took a stone in hand, his eyes glazed over with deference.
“This fence needs mending in several places,” he said, “I shall rebuild those storage sheds over there.  And I shall rehabilitate those fields lying fallow over there.  And that area will be cleared for pasture land…”
They stood at an excellent vantage over the land now.  Chichikov saw the trees swell abruptly into the foreground and then recede behind the crest of land behind them, watching them closely.  He saw the trees accreting and gathering into the foreground, and then decrescendoing and vanishing beneath the rising horizon line of wheat sheaves to his right and a little behind him.  There were the intermittent groupings of two or three or, for example, five trees, intermittent at first—indeed the whole of the serfs’ village was enclosed in one such arboreal caesura—and then less intermittent so that it was a forest.  Chichikov threw a furtive glance back at the forest which he had scrutinized before.  Still everything was in place, and he returned his gaze forward.  He swung his head backward again, as if to catch the existence of the forest off guard.  But again he was rebutted by the actual presence of trees and field; and a jackdaw which sat overhead on one of the branches even cawed down mockingly at his vain efforts.  Yes, thought Chichikov as he surveyed the landscape one more time, there was nothing that was not there, that was not somehow present—nothing that would reveal some secret, some special character, that was different from immediate appearances, that had been hidden at first.  No, it all stubbornly refused to be something else besides what it was, no matter how resolutely and meaningly one gazed into the field.  Our hero staggered backwards and paled, and vomited into the tall grasses.
 “And the new chapel will be built on that hillock, over there…” continued Kopeikin, meanwhile, oblivious, “…and I shall construct a hanging gardens there on that knoll—”
“Whether you do these things or not is fine by me,” said Chichikov, dabbing his lips with a hanky and drawing himself up, “but you must always guard against both doing them and not doing them. That goat, for example, over there, or that grove of trees down there, must not be allowed to be two goats, or two groves of trees. You can get another goat or plant another grove alongside that one, but just so long as it is a different grove, and not the same as the one that is already there. If you do get more goats, fine, but you must ensure that they are new and different from the goat you already have. You must never allow yourself, my dear host, to come into possession of a goat which is the same as that goat down there.”
Upon entering the house, Chichikov noticed nothing out of the ordinary by provincial standards.  The entry hall, vestibule and parlor were mostly empty and vacant, although bearing the clear scars of numerous attempts to fill it with life of some sort: a wall covered with portraits and scenes of all sizes which were completely covered over with soot, and which bore various inscriptions at their bases, such as “Zukhov” or “Conference at the Crossing”—but what the conference was all about remained a mystery; everything had to be guessed from a pair of hound legs sticking out at the bottom left corner.  Or, alternately, in the frame next to the “Crossing” stood a greaved pair of slim human legs, beneath which was inscribed in flourishing script something like: “Alexander the Great.”  A number of chairs and tea tables grazed about the center of the carpet, meanwhile, and had even worn through the floral pattern in some places, leaving behind threadbare patches through which the wood floor could be glimpsed.
Chichikov selected the chair with the most upholstery, behind which a little fire scowled and crackled from the hearthplace, and sat down—immediately he shifted so that he was sitting not in the center of his seat but to one side, with his legs cast out in front of him obliquely; and his hands and kneecaps folded on top of each other so that they formed a delicate cairn shape at their pinnacle, which was very striking to the eye.
Upon entering the house, Chichikov noticed nothing out of the ordinary by provincial standards.  The entry hall, vestibule and parlor were mostly empty and vacant, although bearing the clear scars of numerous attempts to fill it with life of some sort: a wall covered with portraits and scenes of all sizes which were completely covered over with soot, and which bore various inscriptions at their bases, such as “Zukhov” or “Conference at the Crossing”—but what the conference was all about remained a mystery; everything had to be guessed from a pair of hound legs sticking out from beneath the layers upon layers of soot.  Or, alternately, in the frame next to the “Crossing” stood a greaved pair of slim human legs, beneath which was inscribed in flourishing script: “Alexander the Great.”  A handful of chairs and tables were conscientiously arranged about the vast salon, resembling sheep wandering through a new pasture to which they are unaccustomed.  Indeed it seemed they had grazed through the carpet in some places, leaving behind threadbare patches through which the wood floor could be glimpsed.
Chichikov sat not in the center of the chair, but obliquely, with his legs cast out at an angle, and his hands collected neatly atop his knees, so that they formed a delicate cairn at their pinnacle.	
At once the two gentlemen fell to staring at bits of plaster on the ceiling.  Or M. H—, for his part, began staring at the corner of the wood stove, and then switched to the paintings on the wall of which we have already had occasion to make mention.  Chichikov was staring at the shape of certain shadows on the wall, and then switched to the walnut bureau.  M. H—, stared at the carpet briefly and with great intent, switching back to the stove.  Chichikov held the copper samovar in regard now, and then gazed upon the windowsill in a most contemplative and meaning way, as though it were the source of a great philosophical problem.  Then, abruptly, he switched back to the walnut bureau, and regarded it sternly, as though to say, “hm’mmm…you?  No, I have not forgotten you.”
But Chichikov’s concentration was boken, presently, by a gentle hissing noise which filled the room, and he looked about himself for several moments afraid that snakes might invade the room.  But then he realized that the hissing noise was coming from exactly the center of his host’s eyebrows, which were shifting slightly to and fro.  Indeed, Captain Kopeikin had even transfixed our hero rather sternly in his gaze, and Chichikov began to worry that the light and agreeable mood between them had been soured somehow.  He settled back and cast his gaze about the room to try to restore something of the meaning and congenial atmosphere that had flourished just moments before; he drew in his legs and cast them out again several times, until only the hindmost portion of his posterior remained in contact with the chair.  But in the same instant, the Captain, too, collected himself unto some inner, private principle; and sensing something of our hero’s inner vacillation, he anticipated him:
The two gentlemen rose and ascended the staircase to the study on the second floor, then, and took their seats at the little green table, where the game of whist was set out.
“How long ago were you so good as to file your census report?”
“For what reasons do you need this, Chichikov?”
“You ask for what reasons?” picked up Chichikov, but hesitated immediately.  There even appeared on his face a strained expression—the strain of expressing something that is not quite amenable to words—which even made him blush. And the longer he hesitated, the stronger became the raspy whisper which was emanating from Monsieur H—k’s eyebrows. The noise, indeed, was on the point of driving our hero out of his mind, when all at once he drew himself up and said:
“These are the reasons: to have in hand the list—the census—of those who were erroneously registered as …to know, that is, which of us are still real, even though we think we do not exist.”
At these words, M. H—k shifted his eyebrows with such fury that they emitted a noise such as is only heard at green tables when a deck of cards is being shuffled; and our hero looked at the cards in his hand to see if someone hadn’t indeed, by some furtive and stealthy gesture, entered the room and shuffled them.  But no, no one had done so, and he smiled amicably.
 “But Chichikov,” cried M. H—k meanwhile, who had stood up from the green table and turned to face the portraits of Nicholas, Zukhov, and Bagration that were on his wall, “that is illegal!”
“Illegal?  But—”
“Mortgaging dead souls to the bank as though they were living—Pah!”
 “Well, as you’ve been so forthcoming, I’ll let you in on a little secret of my own, hm’mmm, a little confession of my own just maybe hmm’mm, indeed!  Oh yes yes, these epaulettes you see here on my shoulders, hmmm, and this Cap’n Crunch™ hat you see on my head, these are not just leftovers from the campaign of ’12, no no!  And just, h’mm, for your general information, hmm hm’mm, I should like you to know that if this person to whom you are talking, who is standing in my shoes, if he happened to be, it turned out, by the remotest chance an authentic police left-tenant…well, then I can assure you, so that you might not be disuaded from knowing, on that very unlikely occasion, that that putative corporal who we must admit, for all intents and purposes almost certainly does not exist, would in those remotest of circumstances…hmm…”
But H—k presently became so lost in his ironic use of the third conditional that he was unable to distinguish between himself and his ironic portrayal of himself as not himself, and he convulsed briefly in a decrescendo of slathers and murmurs, and fell back into his chair, inviting Chichikov to a game of whist upstairs.
“But my dear host!” exclaimed Chichikov, “we are already playing whist upstairs right now!”
[kopeikin crestfallen when he realizes Chichikov not a revizor sent by the tsar to set right his pension. Turns rebellious-hallucinatory, sees in Chichikov’s scheme a rebellious plot and expresses sympathy for his “cause”.]
For what reasons: wandered off in his mind, dreamy look in his eye, I know—you needn’t hide your real intent from me, in whom you have a sympathetic—you want to raise a regiment for the purpose of invading the Donbas. [Captn Kopeikin wants to invade Donbas to capture his pension, which is held hostage there.]
Yes, I understand where you are coming from--I long considered raising a regiment from among my living souls, but my lawyer talked me out of it—the legal complications are myriad, and make one’s head spin. Until it occurred to me one day—an army of dead souls entails no such complications!
Chichikov has the list in his hand…/If there are no further details, then we shall proceed with the exhumation…/Had taken a shovel into his hand… Take it from one who has fought many battles, never accept a new command without first inspecting the condition of its troops./“You are mad!”/“Ah, you are as much a stickler for the rules as I am. Admirable indeed. I share your concern, this would be a very delicate business indeed were they living; to a studious eye…paying close attention to the civil statutes and provisions of the Russian Empire, one notices a loophole whereby the virtue of their being dead confers upon them a certain immunity from the usual statutes… do not apply  /…What’s more, if they fall in battle, I assure you it is all above board.—you see, they are dead already, and so it means no loss to them, or to anyone else. The funeral and paperwork have already been arranged. A week or two of drills, and they’ll be as fine a soldier as any.
Chichikov slips away and flees as they head to the cementary…/what a madman! Well no worries as I have the list of souls./town of M…night playing tricks mustache on forehead…jumbled musings on the dead existing or not…[thoughts jumbling around just like chichikov jumbled around the britzka, banging against the carriage frame]
***
[Chapter 3:]
CHICHIKOV SAW how the various fields, the various fabular elements swept uniformly together into the aesthetic vastness; he watched them up to the point where they were on the verge of disintegrating and flying apart, but then swept together at the last moment into a seamless, fabular vastness from which not even the finest details were missing.  Each field of vision was, on its own, Chichikov knew, a complete whole, from which none of the contents could be said to be lacking; each detail was a field of vision and a cognitive whole, and yet at the same time a small component of the vaster whole.  Chichikov admired the way the components swept beautifully together into a seamless coherence, which was, nonetheless, always a detail within some vaster whole, and a contradiction.  No matter which portion of the picture, no matter how closely you chose to gaze and scrutinize a given area, everything fell precisely into place beneath the gaze—although something, some main particular thing, Chichikov felt, somehow remained suspended from the full meaning.  And where one sought the remainder of the meaning one found not the remainder but a new field of meaning which was not the extension and continuation of the field, but threatened to be the totality unto itself.  And one saw there the two fields which could not match up and be the continuation and extension of each other, because each threatened in themselves to be the totality of fields.
Chichikov drew to the side of the road and descended the light spring britzka; and drew himself up at the edge of the roadside.  He peered into the field; but it was almost—there was something there—he looked again a second and third time: the fields were there.  And there were some trees.  Further on, some goats could be discerned.  Chichikov gazed and gazed into the field, with a certain air that was at once deft, staid, and agreeable; there was a certain flare of the nostrils—but just what the devil was it?  Some remark was called for, some clarification, but no such remark was forthcoming.  Behind him a sudden gust of wind lodged in the high boughs and made a howling, clattering ruckus, and Chichikov turned around to watch the little leaves that still clung to their branches. He looked up into the last autumnal leaves: they were just little brown and gray leaves, fluttering in the breeze. He trained his gaze on the little diamond-shaped frames of their intersecting vines and branches, which criss-crossed and intersected to form rotund little diamond frames of sky and leaf, and saw: more intersecting vines and branches, which enclosed further diamonds of sky. He peered into the little diamond shaped frames of vines and branches. It was all nameless, of course, made-up nonsense, frozen, dead.  And yet it was all there; and there was no other way to put it than the way it was.  Chichikov staggered backward and vomited briefly in the grass.

Now the britzka turned onto the drive of the estate and immediately there appeared on both sides of the road the tiny houses and barns where M. Donkeyface Manilov kept his souls.  Chichikov poked his head out of the window and began ticking divots in the air with his finger to keep count of the crumbling, dilapidated roofs and cracked windowpanes whence peered the pale gaunt faces.  A blast of wind, meanwhile, buffeted our hero’s sparse hairs and knocked the britzka from side to side like a little kettle on the stove!  “Blast!” cursed Chichikov, who was panged deeply by a fear for his own life, and struggled to withdraw himself.
All around lay a sea of golden gray, which crested and broke against the little berm of road which the light spring britzka traversed.  At the top of a knoll in the distance, a hound turned placidly about a spot on the ground and lay down.  Behind that, a solitary house rose up into view with bean rows planted in its front yard.
Some goats passed by presently driven over the crest of the hillside.  Then there were some small houses which emerged from behind the forest and came gradually into view.  Indeed, the little houses themselves resembled a small herd of goats which had just been driven over the hillside, with little beetling ears and noses, instead of windows and stovepipes.  One of the barn doors opened onto a threshing floor, where a pair of women were busy with the harvested sheaves.  Chichikov saw their rosy arms flashing in the low, auburn light before they snapped out of view.  In front of one of the houses a mother reached down and scooped up a small child into her arms, heaving her up into the air.  Even at this distance the black hair of the two figures stood out from the black doorway that framed their sudden apparition.  But already the whole scene began to wink at Chichikov through the tall golden-grey grass as his britzka descended into another vale, and was gone.
Another house, and then another came into view, threaded together by a narrow path which descended the hillside until it reached a twinkling rivulet, where it transformed briefly into a quaint arch over the water, and then led up through a vast flowing field of wheat on the opposite slope, to a chapel which sat in the midst of the auburn-gray sea.  Our hero gazed and gazed upon this little chapel, and the front steps of this little chapel also winked at our hero through the turbulent, already-whitening rye-grass, until they were swept away by the low boughs of a small forest which passed through the foreground just then—cedars, firs, oaks, birches—and our hero looked up into the branches closely for thrushes and plovers, but saw only the autumn leaves.  All at once the sound of woodcutting and of twinkling brook reached his ears in a rush of wind, and Chichikov glimpsed the forms of two muzhiks chopping wood in a distant pool of forest light; and he tried to espy the twinkling brook, which perhaps cut under the road here somewhere nearby.  But already the forest had passed, and a fresh expanse of vales and fields appeared which seemed to have no end: denisayas of cultivated and uncultivated land, and denisayas of land which somehow were neither cultivated nor uncultivated, but were just land, colored in every shade of gray and auburn, but somehow, even in this vast and staid diversity, uniform.  The folds and torsions even flowed together as gently and fluidly as a shawl of pure sable casually left aside in the aftermath of some illustrious soirée, left behind perhaps even deliberately by some lady, some mistress, as a secret message to her paramour—but rather this diaphanous, sable shawl was Rus itself—the very earth and firmament.  And with likeminded solidity Chichikov was certain of it all, certain of the world that expanded and expanded before him, the world that would only continue to expand and unfold beneath the spinning wheels of his light spring britzka—no matter where they turned—without end, and envelop him in its compass.
The light spring britzka passed the tenth milestone and turned onto the drive of the estate, and all at once our hero was treated to a pleasant tableau of peasant life—a number of serfs and stewards exchanging abuse over something or other as they dragged nets across a pond, which carried across the water with autumnal crispness:
“Shut up, Chichikov!”
“Cut your bullshit right now, you hear!”
“Cut the crap this instant!”
On the far embankment of the pond stood the chef wearing a puffy patissierre’s hat, which was being picturesquely batted about in all directions by the wind. “Yes,” exclaimed Chichikov inwardly, drawing in a deep breath of air, “Country life!”

But the novel, somehow, is always something else from itself, leaving behind, like footsteps, a trail of dreamy semblances which do not measure up to the whole.  Some will say, surely, that something must be happening in this world, which is only what it is—some sort of loamy development and budding lyrical foment—but it is not even so much loamy development, but rather some sort of primary main thing, some main sort of primary happening thing, which is what it is.  Indeed a novel, and the same is said to be true in painting and sculpture, must be only its authentic self, and not different things that are not the same as what it is.  And something is happening, surely, we must confess: the wind howls and the pine trees give a shudder, the fields of grain crest and surge like an ocean—But everything that is not what the main sort of primary thing is, sweeps to the fore unwanted.  Something, indeed: everyone and everything carries on, but beneath the surface no one can remember what it was.  The primary sort of main thing is gone, suddenly—it was never there—and all of the things that were not the main thing sweep to the fore; the unwanted tide of everything that was absent until then and that did not exist, sweeps to the fore.  It is only natural, then, that the novel, as a form, appears at so many points not to be what it is.  One will say, naturally, but if it is not a novel, then what is it?  If this is not the loamy foment and the majestic lyrical flow, then what is it?  We listen in for the answer, but no answer comes forth.  “Well I,” pipes up someone sitting on the sofa of the parlor, and immediately remembers they are drunk and falls silent.  But such was Rus!  A laugh and a glimmer in the eyes—and like a racing sled it is gone!  One looks again, but there is nothing.  Only laughter and swirling snow give any evidence that there had been something there—whatever it was—and then the laughter and swirling snow also dissolve and vanish into nothingness.
Then, further on, there were some goats.  Then there were some small houses which emerged from behind the forest and came gradually into view.  Indeed, the little houses themselves resembled a small herd of goats which had just been driven over the hillside, with little beetling ears and noses, instead of windows and stovepipes.  A settlement of houses came up on the right, one of the barn doors opened onto a threshing floor, where a pair of women were busy with the harvested sheaves.  Chichikov saw their rosy arms flashing in the low, auburn light before they snapped out of view.  In front of one of the houses a mother reached down and scooped up a small child into her arms, heaving her up into the air.  Even at this distance the black hair of the two figures stood out from the black doorway that framed their sudden apparition.  But already the whole scene began to wink at Chichikov through the tall golden-grey grass as his britzka descended into another vale, and was gone.
ALL AROUND lay a sea of golden gray, which even crested and broke against the little berm of road which the light spring britzka traversed.  At the top of a knoll in the distance, a hound turned placidly about a spot on the ground and lay down.  Behind that, a solitary house rose up into view with bean rows planted in its front yard.  Then, further on, there were some goats being driven over the crest of a hill, with little twitching ears and noses.  Then there were some small houses which emerged from behind the forest and came gradually into view.  Indeed, the little houses themselves resembled a small herd of goats which had just been driven over the hillside and then frozen there by the spell of some Greek god, with little beetling ears and noses that resembled windows and stovepipes.  A settlement of houses came up on the right, presently, with one of the barn doors opened onto a threshing floor, where a pair of women were busy with the harvested sheaves.  Chichikov glimpsed their rosy arms flashing in the low auburn light before they snapped out of view.  Then: In front of one of the houses a mother reached down and scooped up a small child into her arms, heaving her up into the air.  Even at this distance the black hair of the two figures stood out from the black doorway that framed their sudden apparition.  But already the whole scene began to wink at Chichikov through the tall golden-grey grass as his britzka descended into another vale, and was gone.
You looked and looked again.  But what was it?  What was this strange sort of something-or-other that was there.  We listen in for the answer, but no answer comes forth.  “Well I,” pipes up someone sitting on the sofa of the parlor, and immediately remembers they are drunk and falls silent.  But such was Rus!  A laugh and a glimmer in the eyes—and like a racing troika it is gone!  One looks again, but there is nothing.  Only laughter and swirling snow give any evidence that there had been something there—whatever it was—and then the laughter and swirling snow also dissolve and vanish into nothingness.

CHICHIKOV DREW to the side of the road and descended the light spring britzka and vomited briefly into the golden-gray expanse of wheat and copse fields; and drew himself up at the edge of the roadside, taking a hold of his lapels resolutely between thumb and forefinger.  He peered into the field; but it was almost—almost even as though—but no; he looked again a second and third time; yes, it was—but no—it was almost as though there was even some aspect: further on, some goats could be discerned.  Chichikov gazed and gazed into the field that stretched out before him with a staid and mannerly air; there was even a certain flare of the nostrils about his face—but it was even almost that—almost even that the scene before him was there.
“Yes,” exclaimed Chichikov, flaring his nostrils again and drawing in a deep breath, “Country life!”
“Shut up, Chichikov!”
“Cut your bullshit right now, fucknut!”
Now the light spring britzka passed the tenth milestone and turned onto the drive of the estate, and all at once our hero was treated to a pleasant tableau of peasant life—a number of serfs and stewards were deployed around a pond, dragging nets across the water’s surface.
The serfs were exchanging abuse over something or other, meanwhile, which carried across the water with autumnal crispness:
“Cut the crap this instant!”
	“This isn’t some goddamn racing troika!”
	“Ah, Rus!” exclaimed Chichikov.
Now the light spring britzka drew up to the front steps of the house, and the proprietor of the estate—I believe I already mentioned his name, a certain—
“But allow me to ask seriously,” said M. H—k meanwhile, “do I really look like a Russian noble to you?”
“Please, Chichikov, just call me Hank.”
Chichikov said: The dead souls, Dr. Hank, that is to say those who are still alive, but who have died with respect to legal form.
Hank: What happens, Chichikov, is that the mind creates a masque or dementia to cover over the suppressed contents, distorting them, and distorting everything that surrounds them, everything that bears the slightest connection to them.  Distorting reality.  The mind not only projects a fictitious event in place of the actual experiences sustained, but projects the whole fictitious background to that fictitious event.  The psychosis projects not only the distorted object, but the distorted world in which it takes place.  The object and field of objectification are the same.  What is called the truth is the composite of these two. / The mind projects a fictitious artifice onto the reality of the experiences sustained—the object of trauma—but it also projects the whole background, the whole field in which it is objectified.  It is the nature of the mind to objectify not only the object, but objectification and the field of objectification.  In the falsification, the making a fiction out of, the object, the field of objectification is also rendered a distorted reflection of itself, and objectification itself is also falsified and made a fiction of: that is, the mode of cognition which produces this falsification is rendered identical to that of the novel.  By projecting the distorted object, the psychosis projects the distorted world.  The obfuscation of the truth content is the projection of the obfuscated truth content and the obfuscated universe of cognition, and hence obfuscated obfuscation, and the distorted distortion.  The whole mind organizes itself around the suppression of the truth content, becoming a function of the suppression, which becomes the central formative activity of consciousness.  But what happens is that when the suppressed content of the past bears an especially powerful psychical charge, the effort required to continue suppression is unsustainable; it threatens to annihilate the whole mind—But this is the problem which we began with: nothing can be annihilated.  It is the illusory aim of suppression to annihilate the suppressed contents.  But it is an illusory aim.  It is impossible to annihilate anything.  What happens is that eventually the suppressed truth content emerges again.  The masque of dementia begins to disintegrate in places, and the truth of the past emerges through the disintegration.
The ghosts of the past were harmless digressions; and since the past in which they took place no longer existed, they themselves can no longer be said to have taken place.  Chichikov knew for example that the dead could not suddenly burst out of the earth and come get you, and drag your soul down to hell.  They were not there waiting to reach out their flayed arms and pull up your soul like a little turnip.  Like this, Chichikov’s thoughts went out and peopled the confines of his gaze.  Objects, too, seemed to mingle.  The only problem was whether you were really yourself, or whether you had become the ghost of yourself and were one of the ones who deserved to be dragged down to hell. [such were our hero’s weary jumbled thoughts on his way back to his inn in the town of M. OR just as our weary hero was bounced from side to side in the light spring britzka, so to his thoughts jumbled mixed pounced]




[…Why, just then a literary hack sitting in a coveted departmental chair in some European captial was musing:] But the novel, somehow, is always something else from itself, leaving behind, like footsteps, a trail of dreamy semblances which do not measure up to the whole.  Some will say, surely, that something must be happening in this world, which is only what it is—some sort of loamy development and budding lyrical foment—but it is not even so much loamy development, but rather some sort of primary main thing, some main sort of primary happening thing, which is what it is.  Indeed a novel, and the same is said to be true in painting and sculpture, must be only its authentic self, and not different things that are not the same as what it is.  And something is happening, surely, we must confess: the wind howls and the pine trees give a shudder, the fields of grain crest and surge like an ocean—But everything that is not what the main sort of primary thing is, sweeps to the fore unwanted.  Something, indeed: everyone and everything carries on, but beneath the surface no one can remember what it was.  The primary sort of main thing is gone, suddenly—it was never there—and all of the things that were not the main thing sweep to the fore; the unwanted tide of everything that was absent until then and that did not exist, sweeps to the fore.  It is only natural, then, that the novel, as a form, appears at so many points not to be what it is.  One will say, naturally, but if it is not a novel, then what is it?  If this is not the loamy foment and the majestic lyrical flow, then what is it?  We listen in for the answer, but no answer comes forth.  “Well I,” pipes up someone sitting on the sofa of the parlor, and immediately remembers they are drunk and falls silent.  But such was Rus!  A laugh and a glimmer in the eyes—and like a racing sled it is gone!  One looks again, but there is nothing.  Only laughter and swirling snow give any evidence that there had been something there—whatever it was—and then the laughter and swirling snow also dissolve and vanish into nothingness.








******

The ghosts of the past were harmless digressions; and since the past in which they took place no longer existed, they themselves can no longer be said to have taken place.  Chichikov knew for example that the dead could not suddenly burst out of the earth and come get you, and drag your soul down to hell.  They were not there waiting to reach out their flayed arms and pull up your soul like a little turnip.  Like this, Chichikov’s thoughts went out and peopled the confines of his gaze.  Objects, too, seemed to mingle.  The only problem was whether you were really yourself, or whether you had become the ghost of yourself and were one of the ones who deserved to be dragged down to hell.

[falls out of house:]
But before Chichikov could proceed, he noticed, presently, that he had fallen out of the house. “Blast!”“But…wha—!  It seems that I have fallen out of M. H—k’s house!  Pah! Well, nothing for it: I must once again enter the house!”  And he set out forthright to accomplish his task; but just then a breeze whispered through a tall walnut tree that stood over the corner of the house, and the walnut tree, which though he did not realize or accept it was the projected logic and inevitable course of his neurasthenia, sent down several volleys of spiny walnuts which barred his path, and he was forced to detain his steps.  But the depth of what was hidden beneath all this masque was as though unfathomable, and our hero’s stubbornness was as though inexhaustible; like those who, after the Revolution, seemed so intent on smashing themselves to pieces against the new reality.   He bunched up the collar of his cranberry colored, swallowtail jacket over his head for protection and continued forward, thrusting out his hand in desperate reconnaissance.  But just then the breeze lifted in intensity, and walnuts came blizzarding down upon his position, preventing him from advancing further.  “Blast!” he cursed.  And he peaked out from beneath his dinner jacket to see where he was, but in the same instant a walnut pelted him square in the forehead.  “Ah!” he cried, retreating still further into his dinner jacket.  Now he heard a soft crunching sound from underfoot, and emerging from his dinner jacket he espied that he had entered a small deciduous grove.  “Blast!” he cursed.  He knelt down in the frosty detritus and opened his attaché case, pulling forth a plume and inkwell, and a ledger with the word “Discrepancies” written across the cover, and setting these implements across a tree stump, he turned the ledger to a blank page and began to make an entry.


The CEH has noted particularly serious cruelty in many acts committed by agents of the State, especially members of the Army, in their operations against Mayan communities. The counterinsurgency strategy not only led to violations of basic human rights, but also to the fact that these crimes were committed with particular cruelty, with massacres representing their archetypal form. In the majority of massacres there is evidence of multiple acts of savagery, which preceded, accompanied or occurred after the deaths of the victims. Acts such as the killing of defenceless children, often by beating them against walls or throwing them alive into pits where the corpses of adults were later thrown; the amputation of limbs; the impaling of victims; the killing of persons by covering them in petrol and burning them alive; the extraction, in the presence of others, of the viscera of victims who were still alive; the confinement of people who had been mortally tortured, in agony for days; the opening of the wombs of pregnant women, and other similarly atrocious acts, were not only actions of extreme cruelty against the victims, but also morally degraded the perpetrators and those who inspired, ordered or tolerated these actions. -Article 87, U.N. Report of the Commission for Historical Clarification


[Chichikov glimpsed their plump, rosy arms flashing in the low auburn light before they snapped out of view. Then: within a black doorframe a mother reached down and scooped up a small child into her arms, heaving her up into the air. Even at this distance the black hair of the two figures stood out from the black doorway that framed their sudden apparition. But already the whole scene began to wink at Chichikov through the tall golden-grey grass as his britzka descended into another vale, and was gone.]
[Behind that, a solitary house rose up into view with bean rows planted in its front yard. Then, further on, there were some goats being driven over the crest of a hill, with little twitching ears and noses. Then there were some small houses which emerged from behind the forest and came gradually into view. Indeed, the little houses themselves resembled a small herd of goats which had just been driven over the hillside and then frozen there by the spell of some Greek god, with little beetling ears and noses that resembled windows and stovepipes.]

ANOTHER HOUSE, and then another came into view, threaded together by a narrow path which descended the hillside until it reached a twinkling rivulet, where it transformed briefly into a quaint arch over the water, and then led up through a vast flowing field of wheat on the opposite slope, to a chapel which sat in the midst of the auburn-gray sea.  Our hero gazed and gazed upon this little chapel, and the front steps of this little chapel also winked at our hero through the turbulent, already-whitening rye-grass, until they were swept away by the low boughs of a small forest which passed through the foreground just then—cedars, firs, oaks, birches—and our hero looked up into the branches closely for thrushes and plovers, but saw only the autumn leaves.  All at once the sound of woodcutting and of twinkling brook reached his ears in a rush of wind, and Chichikov glimpsed the forms of two muzhiks chopping wood in a distant pool of forest light; and he tried to espy the twinkling brook, which perhaps cut under the road here somewhere nearby.  But already the forest had passed, and a fresh expanse of vales and fields appeared which seemed to have no end: denisaya upon denisaya of cultivated and uncultivated land, and denisaya upon denisaya of steppe which somehow was neither cultivated nor uncultivated, but was just land, colored in every shade of gray and auburn, and yet, even in this vast and staid diversity, uniform.  The rolling folds and torsions even flowed together as fluidly as a shawl of pure sable casually left aside in the aftermath of some illustrious soirée, left behind perhaps even deliberately by some mistress, as a secret message to her paramour—but rather this diaphanous, sable shawl was Rus itself—the very earth and firmament. And with likeminded solidity Chichikov was certain of it all, certain of the world that expanded and expanded before him, the world that would only continue to expand and unfold beneath the spinning wheels of his light spring britzka—no matter where they turned—without end, and envelop him in its compass.

