# Chapter 1
WE RECOGNIZE on the earth the rolling contours of country fields, the windscorched green and brown tufts of wheat and heather, and their borders of still denser copse, born more of the idea of property than of the earth itself.  Between the masses of landed property run the thin cataracts of road owned by the municipal state, and carved across the particular fields are the foot- and cart-worn paths of the serfs.  At the highest points of the land are perched the manors and mansions of the aristocracy.  Besides these positive aspects, there are, here and there, the numerous absences and silences of little note (in no particular order): no birds singing, no leaves on the trees, no scenes of animals, no centers of social commotion, no souls; and beyond that, just out of view, were the things that are not, in the end, actually there.
Above, scattered ranks of clouds pass by at an apparent 5-10 knots, and are the only suggestion to the eyes that time has not stopped. Behind this, the pale tablet of sky that forced itself onto the literary space in an unending, unwanted tryst ordained by God, punishing with a splitting pain in the forehead anyone who accidentally looks upwards. Maybe just one patch of blue sky behind the right shoulder of Christ Pantocrator who offers an enigmatic greeting from the cathedral zenith, framed by spiraling babies and saints. “Is He  flipping us off?” marvels the passing traveler. But no, Christ is not flipping us off.  The aural space, meanwhile, is occupied almost exclusively by the staccato gusts and blusters of the wind which all year do not cease accosting the face of land and people, and even seems to aspire to the totality of silence itself. And in those instances when the wind stops, one is overwhelmed by the silence which is even harder to hear; and to which one cannot close one’s ears.
These were some of the general elements describing, in broad strokes, the ambient sphere of rising action.
Now the light, spring britzka turned onto the drive of the estate and immediately there appeared on both sides of the road the tiny houses and barns where M. Manilov kept his souls. For reasons not yet revealed to the reader, Chichikov poked his head out of the window and began ticking divots in the air with his finger to keep count of the crumbling, dilapidated roofs and cracked windowpanes whence peered the pale gaunt faces of souls. A blast of wind, meanwhile, buffeted our hero’s sparse hairs and knocked the britzka from side to side like a little kettle on the stove!  “Blyat!” cursed Chichikov, withdrawing himself into the small carriage.
...Peered out from the vast, splitting, gray tablet of sky that God had ordained them to carry upon their backs everywhere they went...
Now the mansion appeared atop a knob in the distance, like a fly which suddenly alights atop a heap of shit,
Already the proprietor of the estate—a certain landowner of those parts, I believe I already mentioned his name, a certain Monsieur H—k, whose acquaintance Chichikov had had occasion to make at the recent governor’s soirée—could be seen standing on the steps of the front porch, holding his hand to his brow in a little arch to better shade his eyes.  He seemed to recognize the approaching britzka and a smile appeared on his face, which widened and widened as the britzka drew near the front steps, until at last it was as wide as the britzka that drew up before the front portico of the mansion.
“Ah!  Welcome dear Chichikov!” he called out, “So, you have not forgotten us after all!”
“Ah!  Welcome!” replied Chichikov.
“No, but it is you who are welcome here!”
“Welcome, thank you!” said Chichikov again, which was ridiculous because he was the one who had arrived.
“Ah!  But no, no, it is you alone who are welcome, dear Monsieur Chichikov!  This is my house, my offices, I daresay, and so you are the welcome one here…”
“But I am also insisting on welcoming you, your Excellency!”
“Ah, but most honorable Monsieur!  And now you will do me this great disservice?  Why, it is you who are deserving to be called ‘Excellency.’”
“Bah!  Nonsense!  I have neither rank nor title…”
“You have both.  And me?  What then am I, if you are nothing?  ‘Doctor’ perhaps, you may call me, but ‘Excellency?’  No, that is too far.”
“But I insist that you be called Excellency.  Or perhaps if there is some still more exalted title by which…”
“No, no, no!  It is I, it is I, my dear guest, who am forever indebted to you!” and with these words M. Manilov waved his arm back and forth with such force that Chichikov thought briefly that his host was being attacked by invisible bats. But when a moment or two had passed our hero understood—deftly—that this was for effect. Our hero knew there were not really any bats attacking M. Manilov, and he smiled amicably. And so the two gentlemen entered the house arm in arm; and the chestnut mare Assessor, who was harnessed to the britzka, held them in her gaze for the whole time it took them to climb the steps of the porch and enter the house; and then she shook her head and let out a loud snort, as animals do when they have witnessed strange scenes.
	[What happened was...]
A pleasantly dressed woman met them in the vestibule, to whom Manilov flew and, lifting up her delicate hands in his, announced tenderly, “My dove, Chichikov has visited us!” And the two love birds looked deeply into each other’s eyes and smiled exuberantly, as though learning they were heirs to an immeasurable fortune.
“I present to you my wife,” began Manilov, but Mrs. Manilov could not restrain herself, and started down a list of questions that she had carefully curated since Chichikov’s appearance at the governor’s soiree a week earlier: “And what is your opinion of our town of M.? And did you enjoy the governor’s soirée? And what do you think of our governor, and of our vice-governor, and of the  of phosphate fertilizer affair?  Did you have the chance to make their acquaintance?”
“As God is my witness, indeed I did.”
“And what about our councilor magistrate and actual privy chancellor of the strategic petrochemical reserve, and the vice postmaster secretary general of the regency of naval O-ring plant No. 119107?  Strategic Purpose Rocketry Troops. Did you have occasion to make their acquaintance?”
[“Oh yes,” said Chichikov, and drawing himself up he added, “Do you know it is not even that…  It is even…I have never really…hm’mmm!”]
“And what did you think of the new chancellor-secretary-at-arms, and the vice-comptroller of ?” said Mrs. Manilov, “I happen to maintain the highest opinion of their bearing, especially, and of their mannerliness.”
“Hm’mm,” responded Chichikov, knitting his brow into a thoughtful expression: “I found that particularly where mannerliness is regarded, you will not meet with gentlemen so staid and agreeable as the chancellor-secretary and vice-comptroller of .”
At this pronouncement, Mrs. Manilov [exhaled sharply] rested her line of inquiry inhaled deeply  was so enthralled by this masterful command of diction
“And what about our head magistrate-general, and our chief secretary-general of the majestry of naval constructions,” asked M. Manilov, narrowing his eyes slightly, after the manner of a cat that has been scratched behind the ears, “and the archlieutenant-ombudsman?  They have an especially agreeable aspect as regards meaningness, I find.”
“The head magistrate-general and archlieutenant-ombudsman?” repeated Chichikov for effect, holding himself perfectly upright and repeating the words at first, and then letting himself melt into a low and humble bow, and declaiming, “But they, Madame, no…they….” and then, although he knew no French, he threw in some French-sounding noises, and staggered a bit to the left and to the right, as though swooning beneath his recollection of the head magistrate-general and archlieutenant-ombudsman. Indeed, the host and hostess took Chichikov’s meaning without further words, nodding their heads in silent gravitas.
The mood had grown very solemn; and the two gentlemen seemed to be so deeply moved that they could not proceed, until at last M. H— exclaimed:
“Yes, Chichikov!  The country and solitude are well enough, and books, but it would be a different thing altogether if one had a discursive partner—the sort of man with whom one can in some way discuss matters of amicability and good manners, so as to somehow stir the soul, to lend it, so to speak, a kind of soaring….”  And here he pulled a handkerchief from his pocket and dabbed at the mistiness in his eyes, and in a gust he concluded, “Oh, would that there were two of you—nay, a hundred, a thousand Chichikovs!—to bring me the light of restive intellect every day!”
“But no, your Excellency,” asserted Chichikov meanwhile, “on the contrary, I am convinced that I was led here by a certain agreeableness. A genuine meaningness of amiability, such as is evident in your every bearing, is a beacon of light unto a weary traveler such as I….  Indeed, I am not at all unconvinced that our coming together is at all unlike the coming together of the three magi who were led on to Bethlehem by the star….  And with St. Phillip’s Feast so close at hand…”
No one knows what this mutual outpouring of sentiment would have led to had not a servant entered just then to announce that dinner was ready; and the three nobles, who had been discussing the life of agreeableness and mannerliness, bowed and saluted each other once more, and headed off towards the dining room.
Chichikov knew there was the one thing, and then the other things that were different from it, and that the two sets of things could never be the same as each other on account of their being different. He knew that it was the hallmark of things that were the same as each other that they would always, in the end, turn out to be one thing; even though they might upon first glance have appeared to have been different things that were not the same as each other, and vice versa; and that it was the penchant of agreeable gentlemen everywhere to ensure that this fundamental rule was never, under any circumstances, violated. It was the most obvious of axioms, was it not, that, wherever your light spring britzka may take you on the municipal roads of M., all things—for example, different sorts of leaves, bits of dirt and grass, certain pebbles, et cetera—were different from each other. Why, who would deny that the myriad complexity of Creation was reducible to this one thing: 1) that there many things, all of which were different from each other; 2) that all things that were not different from each other always without exception turned out in the end to be one and the same thing; and 3) all things that were different from each other were united by the common property of being different from each other, and were thus, in the strictest sense, indistinguishable from each other. En fin: There were two kinds of things in the world: the kind of things that were the same as each other, and the kind of things that were different from each other, which were the same insofar as they were different.
Or such were Chichikov’s musings at the dinner table, presented here in summarized form for the reader’s convenience, which Monsiuer and Madame Manilov devoured with the same rapt awe who Master Themistocleus, their ten year old boy, slurped up his soup—surrounded on two sides by servants who, with the precision of fencing masters, periodically lunged forth with napkins to catch the snot from his nose before it could drip into his soup.
When the dinner was concluded and Madame bid farewell and retired to her apartments, the two gentlemen repaired to Manilov’s study to deepen their discussion of matters of the highest import as regards agreeableness, staidness, mannerliness, and meaningness. Chichikov was offered a pipe and invited to sit upon a leather chair—whereupon he arrayed himself and immediately leaned forward in the most adroitly engaging fashion imaginable, his hands and pipe collected atop his knees in an elaborate cairn shape—while M. Manilov remained standing at the hearth, resting his head upon his hand and his elbow upon the mantelpiece, his pipe suspended at his waist in his other hand, staring in starstruck wonder at his guest. Ever since the governor’s soiree some weeks prior, he had suspected Chichikov to be the most urbane, entrepreneurial, well heeled, and widely traveled companion to pass through the little town of M. in a generation. And now—although he had made no inquiries as to his guest’s education, origins, or motives—there was no doubt in his mind; and he was eager to sip at the font of worldly wisdom that sat before him. Chichikov, for his part, did not disappoint, holding forth on matters of commerce, the latest fashion trends in the distant provincial capital, and upon certain experiments in magnetism recently published in one of our fine provincial academic journals, until, before either one of them knew it, the coals had died down, and the pipe smoke rose and took unknown shapes in the darkness above their heads; and Manilov strained his eyes to regard the hour, but hour and clockface had long been swallowed in the upturned shadow of the mantelpiece.
Even so, it had been possible, for a time, for the two gentlemen to maintain a subconscious tally of the evening’s passage in terms of silent intervals between agreeable commentaries and clever turns of phrase. But the silences had dilated, and each successive utterance was now a mannerly shell of, and difficult to tell apart from, the utterance that preceded it, until it was no longer possible to discern the order of utterances or their connection to previous commentaries, nor to anything else in the world, as regards logic and meaning. [And our hero revealed the motive behind his]
“I could not help but notice, as I drew up to your house,” started in Chichikov, “the pristinely ordered rows of housing you have erected on your estate for the protection and benefit of your souls.”
“My souls?” replied Manilov, who took such matters very seriously, and was deeply flattered, “Again you are too kind—but yes, one does what one can.”
“Take it from one who has traveled,” Chichikov picked up, flattering his host still further, “such a fine array of streets and avenues one may see only in Rome.”
“Ah!” exclaimed the host, “why, nay, it is just that…”
“Alas,” interjected Chichikov, before his host got too carried away, “the annals of history tell us that even the ‘eternal city’ succumbed to the tide of mortality.”
“Ah? Well, yes, there is that—”
“We must resign ourselves to the hard fact: as surely as there are souls who are born into this world, there are souls who are taken and swept away.”
“Indeed, it is so—” [like in church, solemn. “How adroitly you put it, so important, so fundamental, a truth…I am convinced that truer words have not been spoken.”]
“And so, by your mannerism [wounded mannerism, carrying a hidden wound inside], just expressed by you, I take it that you have lost a great many souls, perhaps, since the taking of the last census?”
“A great many? Well, there are certainly to be a few. To know for certain the exact number, I should have to summon the bailiff.  [to check in with his attaché, who may then consult with the village charge-d’affaires, who lives two cottages down from the deputy-registrar, who may then review—]”
“We may leave such details of the transaction until morning, my dear host.”
“Transaction? Pray tell, to what transaction do you refer?”
“I mean to say, my dear host, that I shall be well pleased to take them off your hands—”
“Forgive me, my dear Chichikov, for I stand at a critical juncture in the development of my estate, and thus have no labor to spare. I need every last ounce of strength my souls can muster.”
“My dear host, I would not dream of interfering in the grand scheme of development that is clearly unfolding on your estate…I mean to refer to the purchase of those souls who are dead.”
“My dead souls? Oh? How so? I’m not sure I follow—”
“That is to say, by means of a contract of sale, it shall be my honor to purchase your dead souls, and thereby to relieve your estate of such a heavy burden.”
Manilov remained silent by the mantelpiece, peering into the darkness where Chichikov sat, trying to search his friend’s face for some hint at the hidden meaning that was no doubt at play in his question. But no hint was forthcoming. The coals had died down, and the eyes of the two gentlemen deepened and sat at the bottom of little pools of shadow that flickered and steadied, like murder weapons tossed into remote forest pools.
“But I cannot grasp,” he said at last, “Excuse me…I, of course, could not have received such a brilliant education as is perceivable in your every movement; I have no lofty art of expression...Here it may be…in this explanation just expressed by you…something else is concealed…It may be that you were pleased to express it thus for the beauty of the style?”
“No, my dear host, I mean the matter just as I stated it—it would be my honor to purchase from you those souls which have died since the last census, such that they are still counted as living.”
Again Manilov gazed meaningly [searchingly] into Chichikov’s face to catch the ironic intent that was at play.  There was as a matter of fact no such ironic intent, but Manilov ignored this detail, and descended into a fit of laughter that was at once, somehow, glib and earnest; and Chichikov joined in with a light chuckle of his own, and the two laughters crescendoed and grew and intertwined in the darkness like the thin streams of smoke emitting from their clay pipes; while at the same time casting sidelong glances in each other’s direction and raising their pipes into the air in a vague sort of salutation; until at last the chuckling tapered off and they were once again engulfed in the nothingness whence they had set out. M. Manilov struck a wistful gaze upon his fields, which were visible through the window beneath a light mist.  “And so then, if there are no obstacles, we might proceed then…with the purchase?”  “Purchase?”  “The dead souls, that is…”  “Ah!  But…”  And here
“[As I was saying at dinner—] Just as there are many things that are what they are, there are things that [by virtue of a certain falling and slipping way] fall and slip away, and desist in being what they are. And there can be no greater difference, no greater a Euclidean distance, than the distance between a thing and its absence.”[ law that two things that were different from each other can never, under any circumstances, be the same thing.]
Chichikov swooned and gave such a violent twitch in his seat that he nearly burst the fabric of the cushion beneath him.  Finally, he even gave a little leap after the manner of the goat, who are known to perform such leaps only under the strongest impulses of joy.
“And so,” concluded Chichikov, “by the same token, even things so different from each other as life and death are unified by the fundamental property of being [different from each other] as different from each other as is possible, and are thus the same precisely in the measure that they are different.”
By the same token, any two things that were different from each other shared the fundamental property of being different from each other, and were thus the same precisely in the measure that they were different.
“And yet, [--it is as I was saying at dinner—] by the same token all things that are distinct from each other, that is to say, all of Creation, are unified in their distinctness—all the more the more distinct. And such that a dead soul stands on equal footing with the living.  moreso  that which is and that which is not share in common, and in this way are unified, that is to say, made one and the same, and indistinguishable from each other.”
“Aha, I see—”
“And ”
 Creation is unified even things so different from each other as life and death are, by the very property of being so different from each other, the same…” the fundamental unity of Creation, shared the fundamental property of being what they were, as opposed to being other things that were not what they were….and that all things were the same in this regard./ He knew the fundamental law that two things that were different from each other can never, under any circumstances, be the same thing. By the same token, any two things that were different from each other shared the fundamental property of being different from each other, and were thus the same precisely in the measure that they were different. Such convictions formed the bedrock of his unflappable staidness which spread like a flowing network of streams of life through the backwater town of M. / Things cannot be the absence of what they are. To imagine a world where it were not so was to imagine the abyss. That is, to remove the predicate for imagination. Go on and try—at your own risk! These were hard fought fruits of long years of staring out of dashed to pieces against the carriage frame on country roads, staring out of britzka windows.  the  was the secret to his unflinching staidness
“Um…”
“In their not beingness, they are.”
  At all of this M. Manilov remained silent for several moments, and brought his hand to his chin, where there was a little beard. “And for what reasons do you need this, Chichikov?”  “You ask, for what reasons?  These are the reasons: / 
	“And so you see, my dear host, these dead souls are—by the very fact of their being dead—still very much alive and useful. Verily, a wanton waste of resources!”


[What happened was...]

[Chapter 2]
NO ONE WAS saying that the dead were still alive, or that the dead—by virtue of their having once been alive—did not vanish and cease to exercise an influence over the world; or that the dead’s having lived somehow exempted them from a tax status that was in the strictest sense exclusive. No one was suggesting that it was not one of the axioms of history that, in order to have died, one must have first been alive for a time; and yet this “having been alive for a time” did not confer upon the dead the properties that are, quite demonstrably, within the purview of those who were still living (and who, by that property, had not yet been annihilated)—the shifting of eyebrows, for instance, or the moving of one’s limbs without the aid of an accomplice, or the holding forth amicably on topics of interest to agreeable gentlemen everywhere, or …active measures in the memories and pre-cognitive spaces of an all-too-impressionable public life, and so forth. No, it was absurd to call “dead” that which continued to color the thinking and pronouncements of agreeable gentlemen everywhere. Even supposing the names of the dead were allowed, by some accident of bookkeeping, to persist beyond the death of their referents, merely by their having persisted on certain municipal tax rolls, for instance, this did not imply that the referent persisted, or that any connection between referent and name persisted, by which means the living could “remember” the annihilated soul, invoke their memory at political meetings, and such. For it was plain to see that No, these were apes and imposters of the dead, still subject to annihilation, with names that could be written down and compiled into lists.
But Chichikov knew that the dead could not be killed again. You could not exhume the dead and induce a second death upon their already dead cadavers.
and that, by that byzantine logic, the dead had  had not never existed at any point in time
He knew, on the one hand, that the dead, merely by their being dead, did not vanish altogether.  The dead left a mark—the little divot of air marking their having once been alive—and that this was very different from people who didn’t exist.
It was just that, at the null point, that is, the point at infinity, they became indistinguishable. And so by a hyperbolic projection of parallel lines the two were, for all practical intents and purposes, the same.






******
Manilov made as though to speak and mark the end of another measure of silence, but instead   but was immediately checked by the disturbing sensation of not knowing how long the most recent silence had lasted, not knowing the hour, no longer being able to judge with any certainty for how long he had been staring absently into the consummate darkness.  And instead of the words he had formed his mouth to utter, he choked on a bit of his saliva and descended into a fit of coughing, whence he nearly did not extract himself.  Only the dancing pools of shadow were visible on his guest’s face, and not his guest’s face.
Chichikov knew there was the one, and then the other thing, that was not the same as the first one, and that the two could never, under any circumstances, be the same thing—on account of their being different from each other. He knew that this was true of all things, the fundamental unity of Creation, shared the fundamental property of being what they were, as opposed to being other things that were not what they were….and that all things were the same in this regard. Many a placid smile had spread across his face, upon many a country road, at the little clouds of pious foreknowledge that passed through his mind. of the fundamental unity of creation. It was the bedrock of the unflappable staidness that was the hallmark of his character, and that now trickled through the town of M. sure as melting snow.  [ there was no chance of the two things ever being the same so long as they were different from each other.] He knew the fundamental law that two things that were different from each other can never, under any circumstances, be the same thing. By the same token, any two things that were different from each other shared the fundamental property of being different from each other, and were thus the same precisely in the measure that they were different. Such convictions formed the bedrock of his unflappable staidness which spread like a flowing network of streams of life through the backwater town of M.





and the crooked lanes and gardens where Manilov kept his souls began to emerge into view.  For reasons not yet revealed to the reader, Chichikov leaned forward on the seat of his light spring britzka and began counting their broken roofs; but his calculations were immediately interrupted by yet another feature of the passing landscape—this time a hillock atop which a small group of hounds had congregated and was baying into the sunlight.
	“Fools!” exclaimed Chichikov, shaking his fist at the innocent animals.
	After this, there was another bend and dip in the drive, and another small forest with ducks.  One last section of towering black copse tapered off to a thin jetty of trees, and then the britzka turned up the last stretch of hillside to the front steps of the mansion, where the proprietor—whose name I have already had occasion to mention,

 and the proprietor of the estate, I believe I already mentioned his name—a certain Monsieur H—k, whom Chichikov had met at the recent governor’s soirée—issued from the door in his pajamas to greet our hero, his pate bared and his carrick thrown devil-may-care over his frock and jacket—clearly, he was impatient to understand something.  He approached Chichikov, who had himself scarcely stepped off of his sideboards, at an urgent pace, but held up at three meters or so, and did not extend his hand in greeting.
“Oh, have you forgotten something?” he asked.
“But I have just gotten here!” replied Chichikov.
“Just gotten where?”
“Here!  Where else?”
“But...”
And the two men let a silence pass between them, each one scouring the other’s countenance for the secret meaning that was at play.  At last, M. H—k broke into laughter.
“Ha!  Such a joker you are, Monsieur Chichikov, dear me!  You really know how to hang noodles from our ears.  And with that revizor face of yours, who would ever know!  Ha ha!”
But Chichikov was not laughing.  “But I’m serious,” he assured him, “I just arrived at your estate now.”
“Ha ha!  Ha!  Ha!  Yes indeed!  I know you’ve just arrived, indeed!  Ha!”
“No but, I’m terribly sorry dear host, it’s not a joke.  You see.  I tell you in all earnestness, with all the sincerity of my being, I have just arrived at your estate.”
“Just arrived?  But…then…are you sure?”
“I’m terribly sorry, but yes sir.”
“But, well then, I suppose it’s possible.”
“I should say so…”
“But, well, then please excuse me.  How embarrassing, if I had known, I would have dressed.  It’s just, the resemblance is striking.  Yes, well, please come in.  And what is your name, good sir?”
“I am Pavel Ivanovich Chichikov.”
	At this the host lay himself gently on the ground and clutched his stomach tightly, kicking at the small stones and rubble of his driveway.  “Haaaa ha!  Haaaaaaaaa ha!  Yes, it was you all along!  Ha!  Ha!  Ho!  Yes, oh dear, I was not wrong!  Ho ho!”
	“But, forgive me, dear Monsieur, I haven’t the faintest clue about what you are implying.”
	“Not the faintest clue!  Haaaaa!—”
	“Please, Monsieur—”
	“Ha ha ha ha!  Ha!”
	“An odd fellow,” Chichikov murmured to himself, and turned to take his departure.  But just as he mounted his britzka, the laughter all at once ceased, and he heard H—k raising himself from the ground; and indeed, turning around again, he saw his host upright, staring quite seriously at the road below.
	“But that is your britzka there,” he pointed, “driving along the road to N.”
	Chichikov looked and saw that it was true.  A light spring britzka, which was not at all unlike his own—indeed, which was exactly like his own, and no different—plied its way down the road to N.
“You see,” said the host, “I thought you were him there, come back for something you’d forgotten.  But now I see that he is quite clearly on his way into town, and has not returned…I mean to say, clearly it is evident now that you are not him, there in that britzka, but an altogether different Pavel Ivanovich Chichikov, here.  Though you are identical in every respect, though you have the same name, the same britzka, the same physiognomy, all this must be pure coincidence…”
“I’m sorry!” declaimed Chichikov indignantly, and took one step backward toward his britzka, then another, quickly, as if the sudden masque of identity was simply too much and he must flee immediately.  But he vacillated, and when the decisive moment had passed he said again, “I’m sorry,” but in a tone resigned to his presence at M. Sobakevich’s estate, “I am not that man.  If his name is also Chichikov, so be it; I am innocent of it.  I have no associations whatsoever with him, whatever the outward parity…”
Monsieur H—k looked up through the little storm of data into Chichikov’s eyes, which surged presently with a tender suffering.  And with these words, our hero closed the remaining three meters and took H—k’s elbow in hand; and H—k offered no resistance, and was led up the front steps and through the door of his mansion.
The chestnut mare named Assessor, meanwhile—who remained harnessed to the britzka all this time—held them in her gaze for the whole time it took them to ascend the steps and enter the house—and then shook her head and let out a snort, as animals do when they have witnessed strange scenes.
<!-- Target Class: Hard ICBM Launch Silos and Primary Bomber Bases -->
<!-- Aleysk (SS-18) ICBM Field: 26 SS-18 MOD3 (Satan); 52.28 N Lat. x 82.45 E Long.; Target Hardness- 7000 psi; Background Radiation- Normal -->
<!-- Derazhnya (SS-19) ICBM Field: 20 SS-19 MOD3 (Stiletto); 52.28 N Lat. x 82.45 E Long.; Target Hardness- 7000 psi; Background Radiation- Normal -->
<!-- Dombarovsky (SS-18) ICBM Field: 175 SS-18 MOD4 (Satan); 50.46 N Lat. x 59.32 E Long.; Target Hardness- 7000 psi; Background Radiation- Normal -->
<!-- Imeni Gastello (SS-18) ICBM Field: 18 SS-18 MOD4 (Satan); 51.90 N Lat. x 66.21 E Long.; Target Hardness- 7000 psi; Background Radiation- Normal -->
<!-- Tartu AFB: 15 TU-95 Bear G Aircraft; 58.23 N Lat. x 26.43 E Long.; Target Hardness- 40 psi; Background Radiation- Normal -->
<!-- Engels AFB: 20 TU-95 Bear G Aircraft; 51.29 N Lat. x 46.12 E Long.; Target Hardness- 40 psi; Background Radiation- Normal -->
<!-- Mys Shmidta AFB: 10 TU-26 Backfire Aircraft; 68.53 N Lat. x 179.25 E Long.; Target -->
<!-- Hardness- 40 psi; Background Radiation- Normal -->
Upon entering the house, Chichikov noticed nothing out of the ordinary by provincial standards.  The entry hall, vestibule and parlor were mostly empty and vacant, although bearing the clear scars of numerous attempts to fill it with life of some sort: a wall covered with portraits and scenes of all sizes which were completely covered over with soot, and which bore various inscriptions at their bases, such as “Zukhov” or “Conference at the Crossing”—but what the conference was all about remained a mystery; everything had to be guessed from a pair of hound legs sticking out at the bottom left corner.  Or, alternately, in the frame next to the “Crossing” stood a greaved pair of slim human legs, beneath which was inscribed in flourishing script something like: “Alexander the Great.”  A number of chairs and tea tables grazed about the center of the carpet, meanwhile, and had even worn through the floral pattern in some places, leaving behind threadbare patches through which the wood floor could be glimpsed.












CHICHIKOV SAW how the various fields, the various fabular elements swept uniformly together into the aesthetic vastness; he watched them up to the point where they were on the verge of disintegrating and flying apart, but then swept together at the last moment into a seamless, fabular vastness from which not even the finest details were missing.  Each field of vision was, on its own, Chichikov knew, a complete whole, from which none of the contents could be said to be lacking; each detail was a field of vision and a cognitive whole, and yet at the same time a small component of the vaster whole.  Chichikov admired the way the components swept beautifully together into a seamless coherence, which was, nonetheless, always a detail within some vaster whole, and a contradiction.  No matter which portion of the picture, no matter how closely you chose to gaze and scrutinize a given area, everything fell precisely into place beneath the gaze—although something, some main particular thing, Chichikov felt, somehow remained suspended from the full meaning.  And where one sought the remainder of the meaning one found not the remainder but a new field of meaning which was not the extension and continuation of the field, but threatened to be the totality unto itself.  And one saw there the two fields which could not match up and be the continuation and extension of each other, because each threatened in themselves to be the totality of fields.

All around lay a sea of golden gray, which crested and broke against the little berm of road which the light spring britzka traversed.  At the top of a knoll in the distance, a hound turned placidly about a spot on the ground and lay down.  Behind that, a solitary house rose up into view with bean rows planted in its front yard.
Some goats passed by presently driven over the crest of the hillside.  Then there were some small houses which emerged from behind the forest and came gradually into view.  Indeed, the little houses themselves resembled a small herd of goats which had just been driven over the hillside, with little beetling ears and noses, instead of windows and stovepipes.  One of the barn doors opened onto a threshing floor, where a pair of women were busy with the harvested sheaves.  Chichikov saw their rosy arms flashing in the low, auburn light before they snapped out of view.  In front of one of the houses a mother reached down and scooped up a small child into her arms, heaving her up into the air.  Even at this distance the black hair of the two figures stood out from the black doorway that framed their sudden apparition.  But already the whole scene began to wink at Chichikov through the tall golden-grey grass as his britzka descended into another vale, and was gone.
Another house, and then another came into view, threaded together by a narrow path which descended the hillside until it reached a twinkling rivulet, where it transformed briefly into a quaint arch over the water, and then led up through a vast flowing field of wheat on the opposite slope, to a chapel which sat in the midst of the auburn-gray sea.  Our hero gazed and gazed upon this little chapel, and the front steps of this little chapel also winked at our hero through the turbulent, already-whitening rye-grass, until they were swept away by the low boughs of a small forest which passed through the foreground just then—cedars, firs, oaks, birches—and our hero looked up into the branches closely for thrushes and plovers, but saw only the autumn leaves.  All at once the sound of woodcutting and of twinkling brook reached his ears in a rush of wind, and Chichikov glimpsed the forms of two muzhiks chopping wood in a distant pool of forest light; and he tried to espy the twinkling brook, which perhaps cut under the road here somewhere nearby.  But already the forest had passed, and a fresh expanse of vales and fields appeared which seemed to have no end: denisayas of cultivated and uncultivated land, and denisayas of land which somehow were neither cultivated nor uncultivated, but were just land, colored in every shade of gray and auburn, but somehow, even in this vast and staid diversity, uniform.  The folds and torsions even flowed together as gently and fluidly as a shawl of pure sable casually left aside in the aftermath of some illustrious soirée, left behind perhaps even deliberately by some lady, some mistress, as a secret message to her paramour—but rather this diaphanous, sable shawl was Rus itself—the very earth and firmament.  And with likeminded solidity Chichikov was certain of it all, certain of the world that expanded and expanded before him, the world that would only continue to expand and unfold beneath the spinning wheels of his light spring britzka—no matter where they turned—without end, and envelop him in its compass.
The light spring britzka passed the tenth milestone and turned onto the drive of the estate, and all at once our hero was treated to a pleasant tableau of peasant life—a number of serfs and stewards were deployed around a pond, dragging nets across the water’s surface.  On the far embankment of the pond stood the chef wearing a puffy patissierre’s hat, which was being picturesquely batted about in all directions by the wind.  “Yes,” exclaimed Chichikov inwardly, drawing in a deep breath of air, “Country life!”
The serfs were exchanging abuse over something or other, meanwhile, which carried across the water with autumnal crispness:
“Shut up, Chichikov!”
“Cut your bullshit right now, you hear!”
“Cut the crap this instant!”
But the novel, somehow, is always something else from itself, leaving behind, like footsteps, a trail of dreamy semblances which do not measure up to the whole.  Some will say, surely, that something must be happening in this world, which is only what it is—some sort of loamy development and budding lyrical foment—but it is not even so much loamy development, but rather some sort of primary main thing, some main sort of primary happening thing, which is what it is.  Indeed a novel, and the same is said to be true in painting and sculpture, must be only its authentic self, and not different things that are not the same as what it is.  And something is happening, surely, we must confess: the wind howls and the pine trees give a shudder, the fields of grain crest and surge like an ocean—But everything that is not what the main sort of primary thing is, sweeps to the fore unwanted.  Something, indeed: everyone and everything carries on, but beneath the surface no one can remember what it was.  The primary sort of main thing is gone, suddenly—it was never there—and all of the things that were not the main thing sweep to the fore; the unwanted tide of everything that was absent until then and that did not exist, sweeps to the fore.  It is only natural, then, that the novel, as a form, appears at so many points not to be what it is.  One will say, naturally, but if it is not a novel, then what is it?  If this is not the loamy foment and the majestic lyrical flow, then what is it?  We listen in for the answer, but no answer comes forth.  “Well I,” pipes up someone sitting on the sofa of the parlor, and immediately remembers they are drunk and falls silent.  But such was Rus!  A laugh and a glimmer in the eyes—and like a racing sled it is gone!  One looks again, but there is nothing.  Only laughter and swirling snow give any evidence that there had been something there—whatever it was—and then the laughter and swirling snow also dissolve and vanish into nothingness.
Then, further on, there were some goats.  Then there were some small houses which emerged from behind the forest and came gradually into view.  Indeed, the little houses themselves resembled a small herd of goats which had just been driven over the hillside, with little beetling ears and noses, instead of windows and stovepipes.  A settlement of houses came up on the right, one of the barn doors opened onto a threshing floor, where a pair of women were busy with the harvested sheaves.  Chichikov saw their rosy arms flashing in the low, auburn light before they snapped out of view.  In front of one of the houses a mother reached down and scooped up a small child into her arms, heaving her up into the air.  Even at this distance the black hair of the two figures stood out from the black doorway that framed their sudden apparition.  But already the whole scene began to wink at Chichikov through the tall golden-grey grass as his britzka descended into another vale, and was gone.
ALL AROUND lay a sea of golden gray, which even crested and broke against the little berm of road which the light spring britzka traversed.  At the top of a knoll in the distance, a hound turned placidly about a spot on the ground and lay down.  Behind that, a solitary house rose up into view with bean rows planted in its front yard.  Then, further on, there were some goats being driven over the crest of a hill, with little twitching ears and noses.  Then there were some small houses which emerged from behind the forest and came gradually into view.  Indeed, the little houses themselves resembled a small herd of goats which had just been driven over the hillside and then frozen there by the spell of some Greek god, with little beetling ears and noses that resembled windows and stovepipes.  A settlement of houses came up on the right, presently, with one of the barn doors opened onto a threshing floor, where a pair of women were busy with the harvested sheaves.  Chichikov glimpsed their rosy arms flashing in the low auburn light before they snapped out of view.  Then: In front of one of the houses a mother reached down and scooped up a small child into her arms, heaving her up into the air.  Even at this distance the black hair of the two figures stood out from the black doorway that framed their sudden apparition.  But already the whole scene began to wink at Chichikov through the tall golden-grey grass as his britzka descended into another vale, and was gone.
You looked and looked again.  But what was it?  What was this strange sort of something-or-other that was there.  We listen in for the answer, but no answer comes forth.  “Well I,” pipes up someone sitting on the sofa of the parlor, and immediately remembers they are drunk and falls silent.  But such was Rus!  A laugh and a glimmer in the eyes—and like a racing troika it is gone!  One looks again, but there is nothing.  Only laughter and swirling snow give any evidence that there had been something there—whatever it was—and then the laughter and swirling snow also dissolve and vanish into nothingness.

CHICHIKOV DREW to the side of the road and descended the light spring britzka and vomited briefly into the golden-gray expanse of wheat and copse fields; and drew himself up at the edge of the roadside, taking a hold of his lapels resolutely between thumb and forefinger.  He peered into the field; but it was almost—almost even as though—but no; he looked again a second and third time; yes, it was—but no—it was almost as though there was even some aspect: further on, some goats could be discerned.  Chichikov gazed and gazed into the field that stretched out before him with a staid and mannerly air; there was even a certain flare of the nostrils about his face—but it was even almost that—almost even that the scene before him was there.
“Yes,” exclaimed Chichikov, flaring his nostrils again and drawing in a deep breath, “Country life!”
“Shut up, Chichikov!”
“Cut your bullshit right now, fucknut!”
Now the light spring britzka passed the tenth milestone and turned onto the drive of the estate, and all at once our hero was treated to a pleasant tableau of peasant life—a number of serfs and stewards were deployed around a pond, dragging nets across the water’s surface.
The serfs were exchanging abuse over something or other, meanwhile, which carried across the water with autumnal crispness:
“Cut the crap this instant!”
	“This isn’t some goddamn racing troika!”
	“Ah, Rus!” exclaimed Chichikov.
Now the light spring britzka drew up to the front steps of the house, and the proprietor of the estate—I believe I already mentioned his name, a certain—
ANOTHER HOUSE, and then another came into view, threaded together by a narrow path which descended the hillside until it reached a twinkling rivulet, where it transformed briefly into a quaint arch over the water, and then led up through a vast flowing field of wheat on the opposite slope, to a chapel which sat in the midst of the auburn-gray sea.  Our hero gazed and gazed upon this little chapel, and the front steps of this little chapel also winked at our hero through the turbulent, already-whitening rye-grass, until they were swept away by the low boughs of a small forest which passed through the foreground just then—cedars, firs, oaks, birches—and our hero looked up into the branches closely for thrushes and plovers, but saw only the autumn leaves.  All at once the sound of woodcutting and of twinkling brook reached his ears in a rush of wind, and Chichikov glimpsed the forms of two muzhiks chopping wood in a distant pool of forest light; and he tried to espy the twinkling brook, which perhaps cut under the road here somewhere nearby.  But already the forest had passed, and a fresh expanse of vales and fields appeared which seemed to have no end: denisaya upon denisaya of cultivated and uncultivated land, and denisaya upon denisaya of land which somehow were neither cultivated nor uncultivated, but were just land, colored in every shade of gray and auburn, and yet, even in this vast and staid diversity, uniform.  The rolling folds and torsions even flowed together as fluidly as a shawl of pure sable casually left aside in the aftermath of some illustrious soirée, left behind perhaps even deliberately by some lady, some mistress, as a secret message to her paramour—but rather this diaphanous, sable shawl was Rus itself—the very earth and firmament.  And with likeminded solidity Chichikov was certain of it all, certain of the world that expanded and expanded before him, the world that would only continue to expand and unfold beneath the spinning wheels of his light spring britzka—no matter where they turned—without end, and envelop him in its compass.
The two gentlemen swept off across the grass pitch, then, and drew themselves up before the vast expanse of fields, whereupon they had occasion to continue hailing and to saluting each other in the most amicable and mannerly fashion.
“But allow me to ask seriously,” said M. H—k meanwhile, “do I really look like a Russian noble to you?”
Chichikov gave a little laugh and continued striding down the turbulent grain heath, knowing too well the pageantry of meaning and agreeable gentlemen.  Still, it was just the sort of remark that he found paltry, facile—unworthy, at any rate, of the repertoire of agreeable gentlemen.  He could not help that his bile was turned, and he turned and spat briefly, sideways into the wind; and some of the frown that was in his heart found its way up into the corners of his lips, which began twitching presently, with the result that there once again appeared on our hero’s face a look of spectacular meaningness, such as can only be seen at Petersburg dinner parties—it appears to be some sort of roguish bemusement at first, but in the next moment God alone can say: it’s not neurasthenia; it’s not epilepsy, nor even some demonstration of magnetic properties—devil knows what it is!—And he turned aside and vomited briefly into the heath.
“Here are my ducks,” said M. H— meanwhile, somewhat diffidently.
Indeed, Chichikov saw that they now stood before a pond, around which were gathered a rather large colony of ducks and geese.  It was the hour for bathing, and the fowl sent up a cogent murmur of splashing and quacking that was immediately caught up in the wind and swept hundreds of versts away.
“Please, Chichikov, just call me Hank.”
Chichikov said: The dead souls, Dr. Hank, that is to say those who are still alive, but who have died with respect to legal form.
Hank: What happens, Chichikov, is that the mind creates a masque or dementia to cover over the suppressed contents, distorting them, and distorting everything that surrounds them, everything that bears the slightest connection to them.  Distorting reality.  The mind not only projects a fictitious event in place of the actual experiences sustained, but projects the whole fictitious background to that fictitious event.  The psychosis projects not only the distorted object, but the distorted world in which it takes place.  The object and field of objectification are the same.  What is called the truth is the composite of these two. / The mind projects a fictitious artifice onto the reality of the experiences sustained—the object of trauma—but it also projects the whole background, the whole field in which it is objectified.  It is the nature of the mind to objectify not only the object, but objectification and the field of objectification.  In the falsification, the making a fiction out of, the object, the field of objectification is also rendered a distorted reflection of itself, and objectification itself is also falsified and made a fiction of: that is, the mode of cognition which produces this falsification is rendered identical to that of the novel.  By projecting the distorted object, the psychosis projects the distorted world.  The obfuscation of the truth content is the projection of the obfuscated truth content and the obfuscated universe of cognition, and hence obfuscated obfuscation, and the distorted distortion.  The whole mind organizes itself around the suppression of the truth content, becoming a function of the suppression, which becomes the central formative activity of consciousness.  But what happens is that when the suppressed content of the past bears an especially powerful psychical charge, the effort required to continue suppression is unsustainable; it threatens to annihilate the whole mind—But this is the problem which we began with: nothing can be annihilated.  It is the illusory aim of suppression to annihilate the suppressed contents.  But it is an illusory aim.  It is impossible to annihilate anything.  What happens is that eventually the suppressed truth content emerges again.  The masque of dementia begins to disintegrate in places, and the truth of the past emerges through the disintegration.
The ghosts of the past were harmless digressions; and since the past in which they took place no longer existed, they themselves can no longer be said to have taken place.  Chichikov knew for example that the dead could not suddenly burst out of the earth and come get you, and drag your soul down to hell.  They were not there waiting to reach out their flayed arms and pull up your soul like a little turnip.  Like this, Chichikov’s thoughts went out and peopled the confines of his gaze.  Objects, too, seemed to mingle.  The only problem was whether you were really yourself, or whether you had become the ghost of yourself and were one of the ones who deserved to be dragged down to hell.





Part I:

Now the mansion appeared atop a knob in the distance, like a fly which suddenly alights atop a heap of shit, and the proprietor of the estate, I believe I already mentioned his name—a certain Monsieur H—k, whom Chichikov had met at the recent governor’s soirée—issued from the door in his pajamas to greet our hero, his pate bared and his carrick thrown devil-may-care over his frock and jacket—clearly, he was impatient to understand something.  He approached Chichikov, who had himself scarcely stepped off of his sideboards, at an urgent pace, but held up at three meters or so, and did not extend his hand in greeting.




	Upon entering the house, Chichikov noticed nothing out of the ordinary by provincial standards.  The entry hall, vestibule and parlor were mostly empty and vacant, although bearing the clear scars of numerous attempts to fill it with life of some sort: a wall covered with portraits and scenes of all sizes which were completely covered over with soot, and which bore various inscriptions at their bases, such as “Zukhov” or “Conference at the Crossing”—but what the conference was all about remained a mystery; everything had to be guessed from a pair of hound legs sticking out from beneath the layers upon layers of soot.  Or, alternately, in the frame next to the “Crossing” stood a greaved pair of slim human legs, beneath which was inscribed in flourishing script: “Alexander the Great.”  A handful of chairs and tables were conscientiously arranged about the vast salon, resembling sheep wandering through a new pasture to which they are unaccustomed.  Indeed it seemed they had grazed through the carpet in some places, leaving behind threadbare patches through which the wood floor could be glimpsed.
Chichikov sat not in the center of the chair, but obliquely, with his legs cast out at an angle, and his hands collected neatly atop his knees, so that they formed a delicate cairn at their pinnacle.	
At once the two gentlemen fell to staring at bits of plaster on the ceiling.  Or M. H—, for his part, began staring at the corner of the wood stove, and then switched to the paintings on the wall of which we have already had occasion to make mention.  Chichikov was staring at the shape of certain shadows on the wall, and then switched to the walnut bureau.  M. H—, stared at the carpet briefly and with great intent, switching back to the stove.  Chichikov held the copper samovar in regard now, and then gazed upon the windowsill in a most contemplative and meaning way, as though it were the source of a great philosophical problem.  Then, abruptly, he switched back to the walnut bureau, and regarded it sternly, as though to say, “hm’mmm…you?  No, I have not forgotten you.”

Chichikov said: The dead souls, Dr. Hank, that is to say those who are still alive, but who have died with respect to legal form.
Monsieur H— looked up through the little storm of data into Chichikov’s eyes, which surged presently with a tender suffering.
<!-- [falls out of house:] -->
<!-- 	But before Chichikov could proceed, he noticed, presently, that he had fallen out of the house. “Blast!”“But…wha—!  It seems that I have fallen out of M. H—k’s house!  Pah! Well, nothing for it: I must once again enter the house!”  And he set out forthright to accomplish his task; but just then a breeze whispered through a tall walnut tree that stood over the corner of the house, and the walnut tree, which though he did not realize or accept it was the projected logic and inevitable course of his neurasthenia, sent down several volleys of spiny walnuts which barred his path, and he was forced to detain his steps.  But the depth of what was hidden beneath all this masque was as though unfathomable, and our hero’s stubbornness was as though inexhaustible; like those who, after the Revolution, seemed so intent on smashing themselves to pieces against the new reality.   He bunched up the collar of his cranberry colored, swallowtail jacket over his head for protection and continued forward, thrusting out his hand in desperate reconnaissance.  But just then the breeze lifted in intensity, and walnuts came blizzarding down upon his position, preventing him from advancing further.  “Blast!” he cursed.  And he peaked out from beneath his dinner jacket to see where he was, but in the same instant a walnut pelted him square in the forehead.  “Ah!” he cried, retreating still further into his dinner jacket.  Now he heard a soft crunching sound from underfoot, and emerging from his dinner jacket he espied that he had entered a small deciduous grove.  “Blast!” he cursed.  He knelt down in the frosty detritus and opened his attaché case, pulling forth a plume and inkwell, and a ledger with the word “Discrepancies” written across the cover, and setting these implements across a tree stump, he turned the ledger to a blank page and began to make an entry. -->
Chichikov pressed is face against the window of the light spring britzka. No souls? Where were the little, smashed roofs of the peasantry? The estates were clear! And yet, who had made those furrows in that field? Who had gathered the hay into the barn over there? This was the distinguishing mark of Rus, setting it apart from other nations. In Rus they had achieved what the Englishman could only dream of: a yeomanry that existed and didn’t exist….
